[Music]
welcome to Episode seven on the nature
of science we're going to look at what
science is and what makes it special in
the last episode I spent a long time
perhaps too long in explaining exactly
what science is not when I use the word
science here I mean what the top guide
refers to as the Natural Sciences for
now when you hear me use the word
science presume I'm talking about the
Natural Sciences and in this sense
science is not a process where
predictions are generalized from
repeated observations that is science
has nothing to do with the fallacious
method of reasoning which is commonly
called induction unfortunately this is
the view you will read and hear about at
various times when studying talk now I
claimed that the process of induction
not only did not explain how scientific
theories are justified but also that
induction wasn't even a method of
justification at all
plain and simple it does not even work
for everyday justification of our
theories what I have done then is
dismiss the entire problem of induction
by saying that no knowledge can ever be
produced through induction it's an
unfortunate and rather serious
shortcoming of texts and resources that
choose to character our science in this
way science is after all our best
attempt at trying to understand the
world it is not a mere generalization of
predictions once again I urge you to
research and consider alternative points
of view to my own I'm happy to discuss
these but science is a process just not
an inductive process it's a process that
begins with a problem offers testable
solutions and generates explanations
which are themselves predictive we can
define science therefore as a process
for creating new knowledge as well as
the body of knowledge generated by that
same process so on this view science
generates reliable theories about how
the world works the best theories we
have in this regard
at the moment form the body of
scientific knowledge now just as an
aside here I've used the word world a
number of times in these podcasts
and I'm using it in the philosophical
not the Geographic sense in other words
it's bigger than just the planet Earth
the world in philosophy is everything
that exists it's the whole universe and
there's some extent even more than just
the physical universe it's the sum total
of reality so when I say science is a
process and a collection of our best
theories about how the world works I use
the word theory in a special way that
I've alluded to before a scientific
theory above all else is an explanation
our scientific theories are our best
explanations of everything that exists
in the universe but what is an
explanation an explanation tells you why
something happens it gives reasons an
explanation allows you to understand a
process or a system it is also a
representation of a process or a system
which closely resembles in some sense
that process or system for example the
theory of how stars produce light
consists of symbols we call words and
mathematics that represent in symbolic
form this process between the star
itself and the explanation there is some
sort of correspondence between
individual components of what is
happening in the star and the symbols in
the explanation now before the
Scientific Revolution which happened in
the wider context of the Enlightenment
centered on Europe in the 18th century
people thought that most reliable
knowledge came from authority and
tradition an authority would generally
rely upon either some rule of thumb or
perhaps an ancient text the physics and
astronomy of Aristotle was followed
because of tradition indeed Galileo is
reported to have remarked that few of
his peers wanted to look through his
telescope because most everything that
needed knowing came from ancient texts
and scholars clearly if Aristotle taught
that the geocentric theory was what
natural law mandated what could the
telescope add or subtract from this the
church as is famously now known used its
authority to enforce belief in
Aristotle's physics
the Bible itself is not entirely clear
on the question about whether the solar
system is geocentric or heliocentric
taking in another historical example if
say your problem was a medical one like
say some infection then a frequent
treatment that came from traditional
medicine was bloodletting the idea here
was that letting the supposedly diseased
carrying blood out would do some good
now of course we do not rely upon
authority or tradition to validate our
knowledge claims today indeed the
foremost scientific organization in the
world in 1660 was the Royal Society of
London their motto was and remains
nullius in verba take no one's word for
it
insofar as these days authority or
tradition to have any part to play with
knowledge claims we understand the
liabilities associated with trusting
these sources now I might have to take
in an authority to some extent that
Andrew Wiles 100-plus page long proof of
Fermat's Last Theorem is valid because I
cannot understand the details all that
the best treatment for a cerebral
aneurysm is endovascular coiling because
I've not had training in neurosurgery
but I also know that these things can be
checked by people who do know and that
anyone with sufficient time and
intelligence can check the relevant
facts ultimately such knowledge does not
spring formal Authority alone it Springs
from scientific or mathematical
investigation into the world these
investigations lead to problems how is
it that we explain the Origin of Species
how do we explain how people catch
diseases how is it that metals corrode
wider planets wander across the night
sky and what is the cause of earthquakes
these problems demand solutions
what is noticeable about all of the
solutions to these problems is that we
explain what we do see in terms of
something we cannot see take all the
different animal species in the world
something we can see
explained in terms of gradual evolution
by natural selection over many eons
something we cannot see sick people
something we see explained through germs
and viruses
something unseen corrosion planetary
motion and stars all seen explained
through electron transfer the curvature
of space and nuclear fusion all unseen
science makes conjectures about these
unseen entities to explain these
processes we do not observe these
entities directly we do not see
evolution by natural selection occurring
we do not see the laws of physics or
nuclear fusion indeed to be very strict
we do not even directly see anything
when we look at one type of fynch and
notice it is different to another we do
not see a Finch as it is what happens is
that light enters our eyes and an
electrical signal is sent to our brains
this electrical signal is a pattern of
impulses along neurons in our brain one
pattern of impulses rather than another
means that we recognize a Finch as a red
finch rather than a blue Finch our
brains interpret these electrical
impulses in such a way that we
experience the world and the way we do
our brains synthesize the pattern of
electrical activity sent to it by our
sense organs and form it into a coherent
whole
that forms our conscious experience of
the world how is it that our senses give
us knowledge of the world well when it
comes to seeing it's just the way I've
described but notice that understanding
this way of knowing relies upon a
scientific theory about sense perception
this scientific theory involves
explaining how light is reflected from
the wings of finches and how light is
then refracted by our eyes and
ultimately how it causes electrical
impulses in our brains that allow us to
say that our senses give us knowledge
about the world this is just what I said
about how sense perception works in
episode 3 of taught cast we do not
observe the world directly to be sure
but I emphasize again that this is no
real problem for anyone who's not
interested in certain knowledge but
rather who is more concerned about
explanations our scientific theories
about how our sensors work
explain that they represent the world to
us in such a way that we can gain
reliable information about the world and
the reliable information they give us
about the world however subject to error
that information might be is useful for
developing theories about the world the
consequence for science on this view is
simple we never directly observe
anything so observation is not the most
important thing in science well I'm glad
you asked its explanation and
explanations can be good or bad as I
said in the last episode those
explanations produce predictions and
those predictions can be tested against
the observations if the predictions do
not match the observations then we must
change or reject our theory but there is
more to a good theory than just this it
must also be based upon few assumptions
and this is Occam's razor
[Music]
Occam's razor is also sometimes known as
the principle of parsimony and although
the two ideas are different in very
subtle ways I will use them
interchangeably here Occam's razor says
in common language all else being equal
the most simple theory is the preferred
one now I prefer to say that Occam's
razor can be expressed as the theory
which makes the fewest assumptions is to
be the preferred one now it's important
to notice here that Occam's razor is
also not the most important concern in
choosing the best scientific theory the
best scientific theory must also explain
as much or more than all of its rivals
in addition of course to being
falsifiable Occam's razor is just one of
the features that a scientific theory
must satisfy but sometimes it can make
all the difference the reason why
Copernicus first proposed a heliocentric
theory
was because Ptolemies idea of a
geocentric theory required far too many
assumptions in order for the predictions
about the behavior of planets to be
accurate every cycle upon FP cycle had
to be independently assumed it was much
easier simply to assume that the Sun was
at the center at first the predictions
that the heliocentric theory made were
actually not as accurate as the
geocentric theory but as we can see from
this example sometimes predictions are
not what matter most it is both
Occam's razor and the ability to make
precise and accurate predictions that
taken together constitute important
features of a scientific theory but
there is yet another feature now to add
to these two features discussed so far
about scientific theories being
predictive or falsifiable and able to
satisfy Occam's razor
the next feature is that scientific
theories should also be hard to vary
they should not be easy to change an
example might help you
why is it that earthquakes
sometimes happen in Japan an actual
explanation provided by the Japanese
themselves in ancient times involved a
catfish a huge catfish this huge catfish
was called namazu namazu lives in the
mud beneath the earth and is guarded by
the god
Kashima who restrains the fish with a
stone which is put over his head when
Kashima lets his guard fall Mamo Zhu
thrashes about causing violent
earthquakes okay so what's wrong with
this explanation first and foremost it
is easy to very wire catfish why not a
tuna or a lizard and why the God Kashima
why is a rock needed why wasn't the
catfish tied up this explanation is easy
to vary and it postulates a raft of
unsupported entities which themselves
require explanation it is hardly
parsimonious it does not obey Occam's
razor rather than actually explaining
earthquakes
it simply postulates a bunch of needless
assumptions about God's and catfish and
rocks each of which themselves would
require explanation if we really were
serious about trying to solve the
problem of what causes earthquakes in
Japan and this explanation does not
generate anything in the way of accurate
predictions is this theory even
falsifiable well actually in a sense it
is if the ancient Japanese who believe
this theory knew about say the United
States which is far from Japan and they
further knew that the United States also
suffered earthquakes then how would
namazu explain earthquakes there
presumably such an observation of
earthquakes in the United States would
strictly speaking falsify the theory
about namazu if the islands of Japan
alone are on the back of the catfish
then what about the United States it's
far larger than Japan presumably it
would require many catfish or perhaps it
requires something larger like salmon so
it's not the fact that the catfish
theory of earthquakes isn't falsifiable
that makes it unsigned
it's probably falsifiable it's not
scientific because the theory is too
easy to change we can substitute catfish
for anything you like and also those
entities which supposedly do the
explaining the God and the catfish and
the rock actually do nothing of the sort
they complicate matters by themselves
being and explained so they violate
Occam's razor the theory is not simple
it's complicated it postulates a raft of
things all of which are unexplained
you're in a worse mess than before you
started trying to explain anything
we really are none the wiser and now
we've got a raft of strange entities
including God's catfish Islands attached
to the vertebrae of catfish stones used
to restrain imprisoned catfish questions
about feeding and motivation and the
list is long and preposterous it's
certainly fun to make up such theories
we could make up one now
in the center of the earth live giant
rolls the giant trolls put boulders
around just below the surface of the
earth these boulders act like bearings
between the surface of the earth and
layers of rock deeper down now and again
one of the trolls Gary the smartest the
rest
let's go of his rock and it crashes into
some of the other trolls at these times
the collisions can be felt on the
surface of the earth as earthquakes
this explains earthquakes again we can
go through the list of things wrong with
this explanation first and foremost it
is too easy to very why trolls
could I not simply change troll for
something else like saying giant
rhinoceros couldn't I change boulders
for huge wheels so what is the actual
theory which explains earthquakes in
Japan and how is it any better well it's
the theory of tectonic plates Japan sits
at the interface between two large solid
plates that are moving at the right
fingernails grow and are grinding
against one another pressure builds up
and is released over time and sometimes
this happens quickly this is felt as an
earthquake this also happens to explain
why there are usually aftershocks and
also why in and around this country we
find volcanoes the gaps between plates
are places where the material below the
surface which is molten can break
through the gaps this also explains why
the plates move they are floating on
this very molten stuff called the mantle
which we call lava when it comes to the
surface this explanation is shockingly
hard to change could we simply change
plate for anything else now it has to
have all the properties of a tectonic
plate and not introduce anything further
that's unexplained okay what about a big
catfish that looks just like a plate it
does everything that a plate does
doesn't it yes and more it then
complicates matters as we would then
want to know how does this catfish Pete
what does it eat how if it looks like
to a tectonic plate can we reasonably
assert that it is actually a catfish the
plate like all aspects of the tectonic
plate theory are very hard to change and
the theory makes predictions it says we
should expect earthquakes all over the
world but especially where plates meet
we should further expect a pattern of
volcanoes they should be clustered
around regions where plates meet also it
also predicts that we should find
evidence in the geological record of the
continents having moved over time for
example we might find very similar rocks
now on opposite sides of the earth or
even similar fossils on countries that
now have entirely different organisms
living on them it also fits well with
the rest of what we know about science
in this case the theory of tectonic
plates fits with what we know about
paleontology paleontology suggests that
the continents used to be connected as
we know that the same dinosaurs that
lived for example in South America also
roamed in Africa this is only possible
if continents can drift I hope what I've
showed here is that a scientific theory
is an explanation it's an explanation
that could possibly be wrong but so far
has survived all attempts at proving it
wrong it should also be difficult to
vary and it should fit in well with
everything else that we know about
science so let us summarize what we have
learned so far about what it takes for a
scientific theory to be good firstly it
should be able to make precise and
accurate predictions that is it should
be testable the science of astronomy
makes clear predictions about where the
planets will be in the night sky next it
should rest on as few assumptions as
possible that is it should conform to
Occam's razor all else being equal it
should be the simplest theory thirdly it
should be difficult to vary next it
should explain as much preferably more
than all its rivals it might not explain
everything but that's okay the classical
example is that Einstein's relativity
explains everything that Newton's
physics explains but also
it can account for some things that
Newton cannot for example Einstein's
relativity correctly explains how much
star light bends during a solar eclipse
and it also explains what is known as
the precession of Mercury's orbit that
is how much the axis of the orbit moves
as mercury goes around the Sun and also
as far as scientific theories are
concerned in order for them to be good
they should mesh well with what we
already know about the rest of science
the theory of evolution by natural
selection does not contradict anything
we know in any other area of science
indeed the theory that species change
over time due to the natural selection
natural selection is a non-random
process of mutations these are the
random part of evolution by natural
selection of random mutations this
theory fits in perfectly well with what
we know about genetics and physics at
the molecular level we know that genes
exist on a molecule called DNA and that
these genes carry information that codes
for certain features the mutations which
occur can be caused by a number of
things including radiation if evolution
by natural selection was contradicted by
some law of physics or chemistry then we
would have reason to question it it's
worth mentioning just as an aside here
that one objection raised by some about
Darwinian natural selection is whether
or not it contradicts what is known as
the second law of thermodynamics it
certainly does not the second law talks
about a certain property of closed
systems called entropy entropy can very
loosely be called disorder the higher
the entropy the more disordered a system
is so for example ice is a nicely
ordered crystal but liquid water is
disordered with all the molecules all
over the place and far more free to move
the second law says that for a closed
system entropy must increase some people
loosely also contrast the disorder of
high entropy with the complexity of low
entropy and assert that evolution causes
complexity and therefore order to
increase in contradiction to the second
ball for example evolution on earth
shows that natural selection is making
the ordered that is life out of the
disordered ie nonliving stuff the
important point here is that the second
law applies only to a closed system and
the earth is certainly not a closed
system energy is constantly falling onto
the earth from the Sun this energy from
the Sun enables life to make order out
of disorder incomplete agreeance with
the second law taken together the sun
and earth system all as one the total
entropy of the system does increase I
mention this because if some people who
claimed that there was a contradiction
were right then evolution would indeed
not mesh well with what we know about
physics and we would have to question
one of these theories as it actually is
however both fit perfectly well together
you simply have to understand your
thermodynamics more completely to see
that there is no contradiction now we
have five features of a good scientific
theory it should be falsifiable that is
make predictions it should rely on as
few assumptions as possible it should be
hard to vary and explain more than its
rivals and also fit with everything we
already know
[Music]
now what else is there that science does
well well here is a sixth feature of
science generally speaking it improves
that is it makes progress science is a
process of open-ended discovery we do
not reach a point and then say well now
we're finished
no we continue revising our theories we
continue to refine them and improve them
things are objectively better now than
in the past
if you have bacterial meningitis the
medical treatments available to you now
are objectively better than they were
200 years ago when the disease would
have been a death sentence if you wish
to get from Sydney to London we have
superior ways of doing so now compared
to any time in the past clearly we have
made progress over the centuries where
once our only means of transportation
was our feet now we can fly and we can
fly because we really have learned some
things about aerodynamics and internal
combustion if you wish to explain what
those lights in the sky are now then it
can be said that we have made progress
in the last few hundred years and we
continue to learn more science improves
in this latter case our knowledge of
astronomy and cosmology is far from
complete but there is no question it is
an improvement upon what we once knew
indeed the data comes in daily and the
scientific papers are relentless in
coming the steps sometimes falter but
this is no problem the general trend is
an improvement in our knowledge we know
there is more to know and more to
explain our exploration of the cosmos is
truly open-ended indeed our attempts to
explain all phenomena remain so yet we
can still say some things with a high
degree of reliability we might not know
everything about exactly how nuclear
fusion in the core of stars works but we
know much more than we did 50 years ago
and we knew much more then than we did
200 years before that this sense in
which science admits of progress can be
identified with Karl poppers idea of
varicella matured varicella matured it
means closeness to truth
now it might very well be an axiom of
epistemology that we can never know if
we have ever described reality as it
really is that is we may never know if
we have obtained the truth about the
world but we can make objective claims
about our theories compared to one
another
clearly the heliocentric theory is
closer to the truth than the geocentric
theory anyone who denies this has
probably ruled him or herself out of the
discussion it is not a problem that we
do not know for certain what the truth
is as I have said a number of times now
almost like a mantra a scientist is not
interested in certainty but rather in
explanations so long as we seek to
maximize varicella matured closeness to
truth then we have achieved our aim in
science if our explanations map reality
as closely as possible
our only gauge of this is to assess our
theories as being better or not I want
to return for a moment to this important
interaction between what the top guide
refers to as a way of knowing namely
sense perception in the area of
knowledge called the natural sciences I
have said already that scientific
theories explain the scene in terms of
what is not seen and what is not seen
cannot come through the senses I think
this shows that sense perception as a
way of knowing is only possible when
coupled with reason now empiricism is
the idea that knowledge is gained
through the senses alone clearly such a
view is not true the laws of nature are
mathematical in form but we do not see
mathematical equations we do not see the
curvature of space-time and we do not
see photons or the Origin of Species
so empiricism alone cannot be correct as
an aside here it's worth noticing that
induction also seems to assert that the
unseen for example the next sunrise
resembles the scene for example the last
sunrise we've already seen that this is
not true scientific knowledge can be
tested by observation but can't be
derived from it we never observed
something as it is in
itself we do not see books for example
we do not even see light our eyes detect
light but we are not our eyes we are our
brains and our brains detect electrical
impulses and we do not detect those as
they are what they are is electricity
instead our brain interprets those
impulses those electrical impulses and
synthesizes them into a coherent whole
that forms our consciousness of the
world and it is here in our
consciousness that we can reason about
our sense perceptions and form theories
and criticize those theories as being
good or bad explanations but we never
perceive reality as it is at least we do
not know if we perceive reality as it is
rather we reason about the contents of
our mind and seek to explain what it is
we perceive our best systematic attempt
at doing this is known as science next
time I want to address exactly what the
scientific method is and some more of
the questions from the guide about the
area of knowledge we call the Natural
Sciences
[Music]
for resources and links associated with
Tokyo's visit the da cast website at
www.nimbios.org
you